# Mentorship
<!-- %TIMESTAMP=1684270800% -->

The most valuable thing I got out of my first job was that I was being mentored
by a senior guy - something I feel like will never come my way again unless
someone is willing to mentor a doofus in his thirties with ten years of
experience. He wasn't a modern "senior" engineer who has five years of
experience either. He had about 30+ years of experience under his belt. It was
really helpful to have someone there to guide me in research and to discuss
things at length when I was stuck. I would much rather take a positive
mentorship than have an education budget that I can spend how I wish. "Make sure
you clear it with HR first haha."

From my observation it is becoming more and more uncommon to get mentored at a
job or even be able to discuss topics at length, but this may be my ignorant
perception now as a fully remote worker. I haven't heard first hand from anyone
about being mentored, and only have seen it mentioned rarely on a job
description.

Another thing I've noticed is how managers don't want to "waste" resources on
similar methods of knowledge sharing, like pair programming or shadowing. "Jump
right in and ask for help if you're stuck!"

It seems the industry is only concerned with hiring "self-starters" and people
who can grind without guidance, instead of properly on-boarding and mentoring a
person to fit in with the team and actually be successful and useful. The
companies seem to be focused only on finding these "10X-ers" who won't question
anything and can just churn out heaps of SLOC.

I don't think this is only a problem with junior devs. Why can't a thirty year
old doofus like me get mentored too? Is that just called "going back to get a
master's degree"? That does sound like an option, along with paid mentorships
that some Github celebrities offer.

One alternative is to find an open source project that is accepting
contributions, preferably one that you use and want to give back to. Start
putting up pull-requests on this project and give the maintainers a chance to
review them. There is a good chance that you will be provided a lot of helpful
feedback and guidance, perhaps even higher quality than someone at work will
give you. This has been beneficial to me, especially when the maintainer is
highly skilled and generous with his time.
