# Some Thoughts on the Crypto Industry
<!-- %TIMESTAMP=1717572954% -->

I've been working closely with numerous cryptocurrencies over the past four
years and I cannot get past an observation (maybe limited by my own perception)
of the industry and its technology.

I will state that I am not anti-crypto, per se, but I am anti-whatever I am
about to describe. I think crypto can provide a useful utility for people,
namely transferring funds elecronically without an intermediary (kinda). Do I
think the world would be worse without crypto? Not really. I am content with
Bitcoin and Ethereum, but beyond those I have not actually found a coin that
offers "life-improving" technology.

# The Technology

I am going to completely generalize here, so take it with a grain of salt. Keep
in mind that I am a "nothing-to-show" dev who hasn't created such "successful"
projects before.

After reading through and working with many crypto projects, there are
practically none that seem impressive anymore. They are either poorly
documented, hastily written, over-engineered or just faulty. Rarely do they
promise something life-changing or revolutionary, no matter how much they hype
it up on social media. With confidence I can say that the majority of them are
just purely copy-pasted code and ideas that add one extra feature in hopes of
securing a voluptuous cash grab.

It's gotten to the point where it's laughable to me when a new crypto project
appears and it's just a fork of Ethereum or some other code with a few changes
added and a shiny, new website with some marketing.

Sometimes I think of all the code written for these projects and man-hours
wasted. It's comical, actually, especially since the code is just re-written
over and over or just abandonware at the end! This may be an issue with the
software industry as a whole, but it's amplified here.

Compare these types of projects with real engineering marvels, like a bridge or
a skyscraper, or even a missile launcher that will end up blowing up some
hospital far far away. Where is the utility in GooberCoin? Where is the
longevity? It's nowhere to be found, because it doesn't actually matter -- it's
FakeTech and it exists on web5 only.

## Money and Tech Obsession

Here are the most extreme archetypes of people in the crypto industry: those
obsessed with money, and those obsessed with technology. Probably sometimes
both. This may also apply to all industries, but I can see it very clearly here.

The person obsessed with money is an opportunist who wants to use technology to
lure in investors (big and small). They want the end product as fast as possible
so that the money flows in and the project says relevant. They will claim that
the project provides something more or is revolutionary. For the record, I don't
have anything against someone earning a lot of money through business, but it
appears to me that these projects are commonly deceptive and don't actually
provide anything useful (and sometimes don't even work well!). They will tell
you that these projects boost the entire industry as a whole and that they're
all working towards a common goal, yada yada...

The person obsessed with technology is intelligent, but how I see it,
unwise. They want to implement the latest findings in mathematics, cryptography,
networking, cfomputer science, etc, but without truly contemplating the question
"is this work necessary or beneficial for society?". The amount of funds in the
crypto industry allows this to be possible. The technologist, investors and
end-user are all feeding off of each other. They all love extremely complicated
systems that are almost esoteric, when all we probably need is something simple
that serves a good purpose and does it well.

Take the latest paper in cryptography and implement it, then generate a surplus
of "coins" attached to this technology, and then sell it to people who want to
enjoy the benefits of snake oil and get RICH! Done!
