# Tech Complacency
<!-- %TIMESTAMP=1725602135% -->

This is a short memo about how I have reached complacency with my tech
usage, namely with my operating system and editor. I have alluded to this in a
few past posts and probably also contradicted myself. I'm not ashamed of this
because I believe this is a common issue among computer addicts - at least the
ones that behave similarly to me.

When people discuss something like distro-hopping, there are always the people
who argue that using Ubuntu or Fedora (or even W*ndows) because they enable you
to be immediately productive. Likewise in the editor wars, where they say to use
VSCode or a bloated IDE. 

In my case, I'm not coming at it from a place of productivity, but laziness! I
am in an ebb of the tech enthusiasm graph.

                                                      
                                                      
                                                      
```                                                   
                     │                                
         Tech        │        ┌──┐                    
        Enthusiasm   │      ┌─┘  │                    
                     │    ┌─┘    │                    
                     │  ┌─┘      └─────               
                     │ ─┘                             
                     └─────────────────────────       
                          Time                        
```                                                   

## OS

Ever since I ditched Gentoo (to try to install Guix) I went back to Arch and
realized it's super comfy and easy to use for me. No need to really tinker since
I have years of established configs and a stable workflow.

I have a laptop with Guix on it and I tinkered around on that for a while. Wrote
a nice config and some Guile tools with it. After I caught the Tech Complacency
(TC) it's sort of collecting dust, so I might just wipe the drive and put Ubuntu
or Fedora (probably Arch with Gnome) in it to embrace a JustWorks™️ mentality.

## Editor

After I created a fully from scratch Neovim config at the beginning of the year,
I hopped back to Emacs and then, ut oh, I caught TC and got stuck on Emacs. Too
lazy to get off cause it is already at the point where it JustWorks™️ for me. I'm
not trying to optimize my workflow with editing by memorizing crazy keystrokes
or learning new editing strategies (i.e syntactic editing with TS).

## Conclusion

Of course, I will catch the tech obsession bug again...it's just a matter of
time. Until then, I am chilling with what I obsessively built before I caught
TC.
